Improve Shader preprocessor documentation (#6563)
godotengine/godot-docs: tutorials/shaders/shader_reference/shader_preprocessor.rst

.. _doc_shader_preprocessor:

Shader preprocessor
===================

Why use a shader preprocessor?
------------------------------

In programming languages, a *preprocessor* allows changing the code before the
compiler reads it. Unlike the compiler, the preprocessor does not care about
whether the syntax of the preprocessed code is valid. The preprocessor always
performs what the *directives* tell it to do. A directive is a statement
starting with a hash symbol (``#``). It is not a *keyword* of the shader
language (such as ``if`` or ``for``), but a special kind of token within the
language.

> From Godot 4.0 onwards, you can now use a shader preprocessor within text-based

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From Godot 4.0 onwards, you can use a shader preprocessor within text-based
```

Looks like you missed this change from my previous suggestion

    // Incorrect syntax (parentheses are not placed where they should be):
    #if defined(USE_LIGHT || USE_COLOR || !USE_REFRACTION)
    // This will cause an error or not behave as expected.
    #endif

.. tip::

    In the shader editor, preprocessor branches that evaluate to ``false`` (and
    are therefore excluded from the final compiled shader) will appear grayed
    out. This does not apply to run-time ``if`` statements.

**#if preprocessor versus if statement: Performance caveats**

The :ref:`shading language <doc_shading_language>` supports run-time ``if`` statements:

.. code-block:: glsl

    uniform bool USE_LIGHT = true;

    if (USE_LIGHT) {
        // This part is included in the compiled shader, and always run.
    } else {
        // This part is included in the compiled shader, but never run.
    }

If the uniform is never changed, this behaves identical to the following usage
of the ``#if`` preprocessor statement:

.. code-block:: glsl

    #define USE_LIGHT

    #if defined(USE_LIGHT)
    // This part is included in the compiled shader, and always run.
    #else
    // This part is *not* included in the compiled shader (and therefore never run).
    #endif

> However, the ``#if`` variant can be faster in certain scenarios. This is because
> all run-time branches in a shader are still compiled and take up register space,
> even if they are never run in practice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, the ``#if`` variant can be faster in certain scenarios. This is because
all run-time branches in a shader are still compiled and variables within 
those branches may still take up register space, even if they are never run in
practice.
```

`Modern GPUs are quite effective at performing "static" branching <https://medium.com/@jasonbooth_86226/branching-on-a-gpu-18bfc83694f2>`__.
"Static" branching refers to ``if`` statements where *all* pixels/vertices

> evaluate to ``true`` or ``false`` in a given frame. However, high amounts of
> :abbr:`VGPR (Vector General-Purpose Register)`s (which can be caused by having
> too many branches) can still slow down shader execution significantly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
evaluate to the same result in a given shader invocation. However, high amounts of
:abbr:`VGPR (Vector General-Purpose Register)`s (which can be caused by having
too many branches) can still slow down shader execution significantly.
```

This might be too much information for the manual. It is incorrect to say "frame", but saying wave or warp is likely meaningless to the type of reader that this document is geared towards. I went with shader invocation which is closer to true

    convert it to a text-based shader using the **Convert to Shader** option in
    the VisualShader inspector resource dropdown. This conversion is a one-way
    operation; text shaders cannot be converted back to visual shaders.

Directives
----------

General syntax
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Preprocessor directives do not use brackets (``{}``), but can use parentheses.
- Preprocessor directives **never** end with semicolons.
- Preprocessor directives can span several lines by ending each line with a
  blackslash (``\``). The first line break *not* featuring a backslash will end
  the preprocessor statement.

#define
^^^^^^^
\ **Syntax:** ``#define <identifier> [replacement_code]``.

Defines the identifier after that directive as a macro, and replaces all
successive occurrences of it with the replacement code given in the shader.
Replacement is performed on a "whole words" basis, which means no replacement is
performed if the string is part of another string (without any spaces separating
it).

Defines with replacements may also have one or more *arguments*, which can then
be passed when referencing the define (similar to a function call).

> If the replacement code is not defined, it may only be used within ``#ifdef` or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the replacement code is not defined, the identifier may only be used with ``#ifdef` or
```

    #define USE_MY_COLOR
    #define MY_COLOR vec3(1, 0, 0)

    // Replacement with arguments.
    // All arguments are required (no default values can be provided).
    #define BRIGHTEN_COLOR(r, g, b) vec3(r + 0.5, g + 0.5, b + 0.5)

    // Multiline replacement using backslashes for continuation:
    #define SAMPLE(param1, param2, param3, param4) long_function_call( \
            param1, \
            param2, \
            param3, \
            param4 \
    )

    void fragment() {
    #ifdef USE_MY_COLOR
        ALBEDO = MY_COLOR;
    #endif
    }

Defining a ``#define`` for an identifier that is already defined results in an
error. To prevent this, use ``#undef <identifier>``.

#undef
^^^^^^

**Syntax:** ``#undef identifier``

The ``#undef`` directive may be used to cancel a previously defined ``#define`` directive:

.. code-block:: glsl

    #define MY_COLOR vec3(1, 0, 0)

    vec3 get_red_color() {
        return MY_COLOR;
    }

    #undef MY_COLOR
    #define MY_COLOR vec3(0, 1, 0)

    vec3 get_green_color() {
        return MY_COLOR;
    }

Without ``#undef`` in the above example, there would be a macro redefinition error.

#if
^^^

**Syntax:** ``#if <condition>``

> The ``#if`` directive checks the ``condition`` passed. If it evaluates to a non-zero

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``#if`` directive checks whether the ``condition`` passed. If it evaluates to a non-zero
```

symbol in front of it. This can be used to check whether a define is *not* set.

.. code-block:: glsl

    #define USE_LIGHT
    #define USE_COLOR

    // Correct syntax:
    #if defined(USE_LIGHT) || defined(USE_COLOR) || !defined(USE_REFRACTION)
    // Condition is `true`. Include this portion in the final shader.
    #endif

Be careful, as ``defined()`` must only wrap a single identifier within parentheses, never more:

.. code-block:: glsl

    // Incorrect syntax (parentheses are not placed where they should be):
    #if defined(USE_LIGHT || USE_COLOR || !USE_REFRACTION)
    // This will cause an error or not behave as expected.
    #endif

.. tip::

    In the shader editor, preprocessor branches that evaluate to ``false`` (and
    are therefore excluded from the final compiled shader) will appear grayed
    out. This does not apply to run-time ``if`` statements.

**#if preprocessor versus if statement: Performance caveats**

The :ref:`shading language <doc_shading_language>` supports run-time ``if`` statements:

.. code-block:: glsl

    const bool USE_LIGHT = true;

    if (USE_LIGHT) {
        // This part is included in the compiled shader, and always run.
    } else {

>         // This part is included in the compiled shader, but never run.

Reviewer: This isn't true, since USE_LIGHT is a compile time constant this code will get compiled out. Perhaps the example would be better using a uniform?

Also note, your discussion of performance below is only really applicable if USE_LIGHT is a uniform or a run time variable

Author: I've changed it to use a uniform.

``#if`` preprocessor statement:

.. code-block:: glsl

    #define USE_LIGHT

    #if defined(USE_LIGHT)
    // This part is included in the compiled shader, and always run.
    #else
    // This part is *not* included in the compiled shader (and therefore never run).
    #endif

However, the ``#if`` variant can be faster in certain scenarios. This is because
all run-time branches in a shader are still compiled and take up register space,
even if they are never run in practice.

`Modern GPUs are quite effective at performing "static" branching <https://medium.com/@jasonbooth_86226/branching-on-a-gpu-18bfc83694f2>`__.
"Static" branching refers to ``if`` statements where *all* pixels/vertices
evaluate to ``true`` or ``false`` in a given frame. However, high amounts of
:abbr:`VGPR (Vector General-Purpose Register)`s (which can be caused by having
too many branches) can still slow down shader execution significantly.

The downside when using ``#if``s is that it requires compiling more shader
versions. This can also have a negative impact on performance and cause more
stuttering due to shader compilation (if not cached). You need to find a balance

> between using ``#if`` and run-time ``if`` statements.

Reviewer: This isn't true for user-space shaders. Regardless of whether ``#if`` conditions are used, each user space shader produces only one set of code which is sent to the renderer.

Our internal shaders have runtime switches to enable/disable defines, which is what causes them to have multiple versions.
